Astro 2.5 release post (#674)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-250.mdx

Custom client directives allow integration authors to define new `client:` directives to gain greater control over when components load.

Integrations can add these through the `astro:config:setup` hook's `addClientDirective()` API. To enable this API, the user needs to enable `customClientDirectives` in the `experimental` section of their config.

**astro.config.mjs**

```js
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"
import onClickDirective from "astro-click-directive"

export default defineConfig({
	integrations: [onClickDirective()],
	experimental: {
		customClientDirectives: true,
	},
})
```

**astro-click-directive**

```js
export default function onClickDirective() {
	return {
		hooks: {
			"astro:config:setup": ({ addClientDirective }) => {
				addClientDirective({
					name: "click",
					entrypoint: "astro-click-directive/click.js",
				})
			},
		},
	}
}
```

Now you can use `client:click` on any of your framework components with full type support.

```astro
<Counter client:click />
```

See the [LINK TO DOCS](#) to learn how to build these types of integrations.

## HTML minification

You can now opt-in to minification of the HTML produced by your Astro components.

> Using the `compressHTML` option Astro will remove all whitespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `compressHTML` option, Astro will remove all whitespace from your HTML including line breaks.
```
Feels like this sentence could be a bit longer for flow.

We wanted to enable minification without sacrificing performance. For server-rendered apps, doing minification on each render could be costly. With `compressHTML` your components are compressed by the Astro compiler, only once and during the build.

You can enable this in your config:

```js
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config"
export default defineConfig({
	compressHTML: true,
})
```

> Compression occurs both in development mode and in the final build.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: compression occurs both in development mode and in the final build.
```
Otherwise, this feels a little out of nowhere.

Another option, add an explanation of why/why this is helpful: 
> Compression occurs both in development mode and in the final build so that 
-  you can spot any errors or unintended rendering?
- you can check your output while developing?

Something like that.

> This option _will not_ compress HTML produced by framework components. If you'd like that functionality it can easily be achieved by writing a [middleware](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/middleware/) to compress HTML responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this option _will not_ compress HTML produced by framework component you can write a [middleware](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/middleware/) to compress HTML responses.
```

## Parallelized rendering

> When rendering components Astro will now render them in parallel, allowing components that do their own data loading to not be blocked by other components higher in the tree that are also loading data. A simple example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro will now render components in parallel so that data-loading components higher in the tree will no longer block other components that are also loading data, as in the example below:
```

```astro
<Delayed ms={30} />
<Delayed ms={20} />
<Delayed ms={40} />
<Delayed ms={10} />
```

> This `<Delayed />` component waits a number of milliseconds. In the past each component would need to wait for the previous to finish before it started rendering. In 2.5 these will now all render at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `<Delayed />` component waits a number of milliseconds. Previously, each component would need to wait for the previous to finish before it started rendering. In 2.5 these will now all render at the same time.
```

> We attempted to add this optimization in the past but were lacking good benchmarks to ensure that this didn't actually _slow down_ rendering. Recent improvements to our benchmarking CI infrastructure has now allowed us to implement this with confidence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fun fact: we attempted to add this optimization in the past but were lacking good benchmarks to ensure that this didn't actually _slow down_ rendering. Recent improvements to our benchmarking CI infrastructure has now allowed us to implement this with confidence.
```
I don't know, my brain just went here. Ignore if you don't like it!  :joy:

## Polymorphic type helper

Astro now includes a TypeScript helper (`Polymorphic`) to make it easier to build components that can render as different HTML elements with full type safety. This is useful for components like `<Link>` that can render as either `<a>` or `<button>` depending on the props passed to it.

> The example below implements a fully-typed, polymorphic component that can render as any HTML element. The HTMLTag type is used to ensure that the as prop is a valid HTML element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below implements a fully-typed, polymorphic component that can render as any HTML element. The HTMLTag type is used to ensure that the `as` prop is a valid HTML element.
```
I think this will be easier to read?

socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-250/og-image-2_5-release.jpg"
lang: "en"
---

We just released Astro 2.5, with a big list of features including:

- **[Data collections and references](#data-collections-and-references)**: Your `src/content` folder can now includes JSON and YAML files to store data. You can reference this data from your other collections.
- **[Hybrid rendering (experimental)](#static-by-default-hybrid-rendering-experimental)**: Allow server routes in your mostly static sites.
- **[Custom client directives (experimental)](#custom-client-directives-experimental)**: A new API for integrations to define their own loading mechanics for `client:` directives.
- **[HTML minification](#html-minification)**: An option to allow you to minify your Astro templates.
- **[Parallelized rendering](#parallelized-rendering)**: Astro now runs sibling components in parallel, speeding up rendering when you have multiple components doing their own data loading.
- **[Polymorphic type helper](#polymorphic-type-helper)**: Define a component that accepts the same props as built-in elements.

## Data collections and references

> Content collections are Astro's first-class story to managing and authoring content. Astro 2.5 takes that story even further with **new data formats and collection references.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Content collections are Astro's first-class solution to managing and authoring content. Astro 2.5 takes that story even further with **new data formats and collection references.**
```
I'm thinking either "solution to" or "story for"? (Even if you use solution, still OK to keep "story" in the second sentence, I think?)

> First, we've introduced a new `type: 'data'` property to store data formats like JSON and YAML in any collection. This unlocks new forms of content including author profiles, reusable image alt text, translation dictionaries, and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we've introduced a new `type: 'data'` property to store data formats like JSON and YAML in their own collections. This unlocks using collections for new forms of content including author profiles, reusable image alt text, translation dictionaries, and more.
```
Kind of a lie to say they can go in ANY collection... (e.g. an existing collection with content files in it) so I think some kind of clear separation makes sense here.

> Create data collections alongside your existing content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create data collections alongside your existing content collections:
```
Same idea as above. I think we should REALLY emphasize that these are their own collections.

```diff
src/content/
    blog/
        week-1.md
        week-2.md
+    authors/
+        grace-hopper.json
+        alan-turing.json
```

> And configure using the new `type: 'data'` property:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure them using the new `type: 'data'` property:
```

```ts
// src/content/config.ts
import { defineCollection, z } from "astro:content"

const authors = defineCollection({
	type: "data",
	schema: z.object({
		name: z.string(),
		socialLink: z.string().url(),
	}),
})

const blog = defineCollection({
	type: "content",
	schema: z.object({
		/* ... */
	}),
})

export const collections = { blog: blog, authors: authors }
```

> You may also want to "reference" related entries. A common example is a blog post that references reusable author profiles stored as JSON, or related post URLs stored in the same collection. You can configure these relationships using the new `reference()` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may also want to "reference" related entries. A common example is a blog post that references reusable author profiles stored as JSON in a data collection, or related post URLs stored in the same collection. You can configure these relationships using the new `reference()` function:
```
I like the parallelism of specifying the collection in both places.
